[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi, it's James here
from "Food Matters,"
and welcome to this special
interview with Shelly Lefkoe.
Shelly is an established voice
in the conscious parenting
movement and also in helping us
understand how our beliefs are
like these invisible
rails guiding our lives
and what we can do
to identify them
as either limiting or
positive and shift them
so that we can live a
more happy, abundant,
and more conscious life.
Shelly, hello.
>> Hi.
My God, that was perfectly said.
[LAUGHS]
>> I never know how
it's going to come out.
>> Well, that was good.
You nailed it.
>> Great.
So your foray into
becoming aware of how
a child gets conditioned
was obviously
born out of experience.
How did that happen for you?
>> My husband created--
my husband and I
created a process
that quickly and permanently--
that helps people quickly and
permanently eliminate beliefs.
And they come to us with
problems, from procrastination
to depression to
I can't stand up
for myself to fear of public
speaking, any range of things.
And we uncover the beliefs
that are causing the problems.
And if you eliminate the
beliefs, which we do,
you can eliminate the problems.
>> So tell me, how did this--
how did you come about this
type of work?
Was there a personal experience
that sort of drove you
to becoming aware of how
powerful these beliefs are
in our lives and in parenting?
>> Yeah.
Well, besides being a
parent of two girls,
it really came out of
my work with people.
So 30 years ago, my
husband created a process
that helps people get rid
of the problems, issues
that they have, whether it's
procrastination, depression,
not being able to stand up for
yourself, relationship issues,
fear of public speaking.
Underlying all of those
issues are these beliefs.
And when you
eliminate the beliefs,
the issues literally disappear.
So I started
working with people,
and when we started
tracking these beliefs back
to parenting, particularly
self-esteem beliefs, beliefs
about money,
beliefs about life--
and by the word "belief,"
I want to say what
I mean when I use that word.
So a belief is something--
it's a statement about reality
that you believe is the truth.
So that's just what a belief is.
I believe people
can't be trusted,
or I believe people
are good at heart.
Those are beliefs.
So when we looked for the
source of the beliefs,
it went back to early
stages of parenting.
And it suddenly became
apparent to me--
a parent, [LAUGHS]---- that
if children were criticized
heavily, they would conclude,
I'm not good enough.
If they weren't given love and
affection, they would conclude,
well, I guess I'm
not worth loving.
If they were ignored or
weren't given enough attention,
they would conclude,
I'm not important.
And all of a sudden,
I started realizing,
when I ask parents, James,
when your child comes home--
I'm sorry, when you
come home at the end
of the day, what does your
child do when they see you?
And everybody in every
country around the world
says the same thing--
they run to me.
And I say, and
what do they want?
They want three things.
They want affection,
attention, and acknowledgment.
So if they are not
getting those things,
what is the one-word
question every child asks?
Why?
Right?
Why can't I have a playdate?
Why can't I have dessert?
Why can't-- you know, why
do you have to go to work?
Why can't we stay home?
Why do we have to go to school?
That's what they ask.
Why am I getting criticized?
Why can't I live up to
my parent's expectations?
Why are my parents always
complaining about money?
You know, why-- well,
oh, I guess money
is scarce and hard to get.
And we're watching, we're
seeing these things unveil.
So I'm just sitting
and listening to this,
and I just said, oh my god.
If we could change
the way we parent,
if we could transform the
way in which we parent,
we could change the world.
It was just like, boom.
So that's how it started.
>> Beautiful.
If we-- and I agree with
you, first and foremost,
because I mean, I subscribe
to that same ideology.
But if we delve into
beliefs a little deeper--
so you're telling me
that these are mostly
conditioned at this young
age, this early age.
And then how do
they grow to power
and control our lives
as we become older?
What sort of invisible
power do they have over us?
>> Yeah.
It's interesting that
you say conditioned.
We work with emotional
conditioning,
which is more of a
Pavlov's dog thing.
So if every time
you hit your child
if they do something
wrong or if they talk back
to you, if they speak up--
every time they speak up,
you slap them.
You know, at some
point, they'll speak up,
and they'll go like this.
You know, that fear starts
to become conditioned.
And I'm very
particular about words,
so I want to just clean that up.
It isn't necessarily that
beliefs get conditioned.
Here's the thing
about beliefs, why
they stay with us for
so long, and then I'll
explain why they run our lives.
We think that we see our
beliefs in the world.
So beliefs are actually
meaning, right?
So we-- something happens.
We get criticized, and
we give it the meaning,
oh, I guess I'm not good enough.
And then we get
criticized again,
and we go, yeah,
I'm not good enough.
And then the third time
we give it the meaning,
the meaning becomes a belief.
Now, I have a belief, OK?
And so we look at our
childhoods, and we go--
and when I ask this question
to people from, again,
every country in the world--
I work on Zoom, so I
have clients in Uganda.
And I say, doesn't it seem like
you saw I'm not good enough?
And they say,
well, I did see it.
And I say, really?
Can you see my scarf?
They say yes.
Does it have a color,
shape, and location?
Yes.
Does I'm not good enough have
a color, shape, and location?
No.
You can't see I'm not good.
But before we do
that, they say, well,
but I saw my father
criticize me,
and I saw I didn't get A's in
school, and I saw, you know,
my mother tell me that I
would never amount to anything
or, you know, all
the wonderful things
that sometimes people
say to children.
I saw I wasn't important.
No, you saw your parents
busy working all the time,
not being at home, not
paying attention to you.
That's seeable.
But you cannot see a belief.
So that's how
beliefs get formed.
It's like Santa Claus.
Look, there's a Santa Claus.
For eight years, you believe
there is a Santa Claus.
He's got a red suit
and a white beard.
And one day, you go,
that's my father.
[MOUTHS EXPLOSION SOUND] You
know, so the belief is gone.
So that's how they get formed.
Now, why do they run our lives?
If you believe
that water is hot,
are you going to put
your finger in it?
If you believe I don't
deserve good things--
I'm just going to rattle
off a lot of common
believes people have--
are you going to ask
for what you want?
Are you going to buy
yourself a nice new car?
You just won't.
Now, the beliefs
are unconscious.
So when I work with people,
that they don't come in and go,
I have this belief.
Can I get rid of it?
And first of all, nobody cares
about getting rid of beliefs.
You care about getting
rid of patterns.
You want to get rid of the
fact that you procrastinate.
fact that you don't speak up
for yourself.
You don't ask for what you want.
You haven't asked for a raise.
You let people take advantage
of you, whatever it is.
So if you believe
I'm not important,
you're going to
sit in a meeting,
and the little
voice in your head
is going to go, yeah, no,
they probably know this,
or nobody cares what
you have to say.
And that voice comes
from your beliefs
until you don't speak up.
It's so simple.
If you believe I'm going
to get what I want--
here's a really good example.
One of the most common
beliefs, James, and it's
shocking because evidence
does not get rid of beliefs.
I have worked with
five Harvard PhDs who
had the belief "I'm stupid."
I said, but you have
a PhD from Harvard.
Yeah, I conned my
way through Harvard.
The first time I heard
that, I was like, what?
But when he was a
boy, his father--
every time he would say
something that wasn't correct,
his father would smack them on
the back of the head and say,
"genius."
So again, I saw I was stupid.
And the fact that I have
evidence to the contrary
does not change beliefs.
So there have been many, many,
many, many books written--
business books,
particularly-- on the fact
that mistakes and failures
are learning opportunities.
You know, Richard Branson
says, if you're not
making mistakes
and failing, you're
going to be mediocre
because you're
doing what you did yesterday,
and you're never going
to be successful doing that.
So when people come
to me, and they say,
you know, I have a fear
of public speaking,
or I have a fear of social--
what do you believe?
And we uncover mistakes
and failures are bad,
or if I make a mistake or
fail, I'll be rejected.
And even though they
know it's true--
they know that that belief is
not true, it still runs them.
So they're terrified
to make a mistake
or fail when
intellectually they know
you can't be innovative without
making mistakes and failing.
So these beliefs run us, even
if we know they're not true.
>> Mm.
Can we speak a little
bit to, specifically,
a lot of people grow up with
parents that might be abusive?
That might be they've had their
own issues in their childhood,
and they're just doing
the best they can
with the tools they have.
Maybe they've got narcissistic
personality disorder
or something like this,
and then as a child
growing up with that experience
or becoming an adult,
and they start to
realize, well, I'm
behaving in a unique way
with my significant other,
or I'm doing this-- is
that how people identify
their beliefs because
of the way that they're
behaving in the world, and
that it's holding them back
from something?
>> Yeah, I would say most people
don't identify their beliefs.
Most people aren't thinking
in terms of beliefs.
But a lot of people talk
about legacy, and you know,
we do what we see.
And I'm not negating that, but
it's how these beliefs, again,
get formed is if you see one
of your parents screaming
at the other one, you
may conclude, ah, the way
to get what you
want is to scream,
to control and dominate and
have something like that.
So now, you find
yourself doing that.
And then, if you're
conscious enough to say,
this is a problem,
this is not working,
this is something
I have to change,
then you seek out the help.
And some people
do primal scream,
and some people do therapy, and
people do all kinds of things.
In my experience, you learn
how to cope with these issues,
and some modalities
help you change them.
But in my work, I'm
the one who helps
the person say, what must
you believe to scream
at somebody that you love?
And you said something that
I really want to illuminate.
Most people do
the best they can.
We all do.
Parents want the
best for their kids.
They love their kids.
You know, nobody wants to
scream at their husband.
You know, people are good--
I believe-- in their hearts.
But we are controlled
by these beliefs.
You know, I hate the word
when we say, "we're damaged."
See, I don't think
we're damaged.
I think once you get rid of the
beliefs, anything is possible.
You know, we were sharing
before the interview--
we did a study with
incarcerated men
and why they do the
things that they do.
They were getting out
of prison, and then
instead of going to
rehabilitation or whatever,
they came to us.
And we produced statistically
significant behavior changes
in people who couldn't even look
at us when we talked to them.
They would just be like this
and like this, and by the 10th--
we did like, I think, 14
sessions and 12 sessions--
and by the end,
the later sessions,
they were kind of looking at
us and it was amazing, amazing.
But they had beliefs like,
you know, as a way to--
if somebody does
something wrong,
they deserve to be punished,
and the way to be punished
is to be beaten because that's
what happened to him when
he was a kid.
So he concluded.
It wasn't just that he saw that.
He actually gave
it the meaning--
ah, oh, I see.
When you do something wrong,
you deserve to be punished.
And the way to be
punished is to be beaten.
He didn't know anything else.
So that was a
conclusion he reached.
And conclusions
live in your mind.
And so once those beliefs
get-- you know, once he got,
I never saw that I
deserved to be punished.
I just saw that I was punished.
And I didn't see that
everybody does that.
See, I want to make that point.
When you were little,
parents, or people--
your mother is women,
your father is men,
or if you have same
sex parents, you know,
that's just the way it is.
So we make these gender
roles, sweeping statements.
You know, when I ask people,
do you have the belief--
like, because they tell
me, I can never get what,
and I'm always efforting,
and I'm always struggling.
Money comes hard.
Everything comes hard.
So I'll say to them,
say this out loud,
because this is how you test
to see if you have a belief.
Say, life is hard.
And they look at me, and
they go, well, life is hard.
Like, that's not a belief.
Life is hard.
That's-- you know, there
are certain beliefs that are
so real to people.
So when we worked with these
incarcerated men, or my best
population--
incest survivors
and rape victims.
I'm damaged goods.
I'm worthless.
I'm powerless.
Men have all the power.
[MOUTHS EXPLOSION SOUND]
When those beliefs go away
in one or two sessions,
there's a freedom that's--
it always makes me cry.
I'm sorry.
And they no longer have
to define themselves
by something that happened
in their childhoods.
Now, their parents, as
to speak to the point we
were just talking about--
their parents are not
horrible, bad, terrible people.
They're either, you know,
in the case of an incest
survivor, that's serious,
possibly either mental illness,
or could be beliefs.
You know, that's not generally
the people they work with.
They don't come to
me, unfortunately.
So I don't know a lot
about what causes that.
But I do know for sure that
beliefs are probably involved,
and I do know for sure
that it's undoable.
And that's the most
gratifying work in the world.
And also, working
with teenagers--
here's-- you know, I can't work
with young kids unfortunately,
but we kind of start at 12.
Here are kids who
have beliefs that will
inform the rest of their lives.
And when you get rid
of them, it's magic.
It's really powerful.
>> Well, I can attest to that
because my life has started
over and over again
throughout my life.
You know, there's these new
emanations of your life,
and you're like, wow, I didn't
think that was possible,
or I've done this,
or I've done that.
And that's come through
shifting beliefs about what
I believe to be possible.
And I want to touch a
little bit on this idea
that meaning is not inherently
true or correct because there's
another gentleman
we interviewed--
I'm not sure if you're
familiar with him--
Ira Israel.
And I love him.
He's written a book called, "How
to Survive Your Childhood Now
That You're an Adult"--
great title.
But he had a horrific
accident, and he nearly died.
And had big face
trauma and body,
and it's just nearly
missed his artery.
And he lived with
this victim mentality.
People should say,
what happened to you,
what happened to your face?
And he goes, I nearly
died in a car accident.
And it wasn't till
many years later
that he was in a workshop,
and this gentleman said,
you didn't really die.
You added that.
There was an accident.
All these other things
make you this victim
of this story of your life, and
then you're stuck in this rut
unnecessarily.
He says, you can't nearly die.
You're either dead or alive.
You can't nearly be pregnant.
You're either pregnant
or you're not.
So all these ways that we
add meaning to our lives
can really control us.
So could you speak to this
idea of meaning and attachment
and making things up
in our minds, really?
>> Yes.
Yeah.
So for many years, my husband
thought that we come in,
we form beliefs, and
then we give meaning
given the beliefs that we form.
And then, we realized--
we sat, and we
went we really looked
at this, and we realized
that meaning comes first.
You come into the world.
You give meaning, right?
What does this mean?
Why are my parents struggling?
Well, I guess money is
scarce and hard to get.
Well, there they are.
They're struggling again.
Yeah, boy, it really
looks like money
is scarce and hard to get.
And at some point, you
start believing it.
Now, your beliefs will determine
the meaning you give events.
So for instance, let's assume
somebody walks by and doesn't
speak to you, and you have the
belief "people don't like me,"
you're going to give
it the meaning that he
doesn't like you.
If you believe-- if you
don't have that belief,
and you don't have any
specific beliefs about people,
people are fine,
somebody walks by you
and doesn't say hello, you
might give it the meaning,
oh, maybe they didn't see me, or
maybe they're having a bad day.
If you have the mean--
sorry, if you have the
belief "I'm not good enough,"
and you have a
project that fails,
you're going to give it the
meaning, oh god, I'm a failure,
I'm a loser, I'm terrible.
If you have the belief mistakes
and failures are learning
opportunities, and
that's how you grow,
and your project fails, you go--
you know, I once heard
Steve Wynn speak,
the famous hotel
builder, and he said,
you know, I want
to tell you when
what happens when one of my
buildings fail, you know,
when one of my hotels
goes bankrupt, what I do.
And everybody takes
out their pens,
and they're all ready
to write, and he
goes, I build another one.
So the meaning he gave
it is sometimes you win,
and sometimes you lose.
And you just build another one.
But it doesn't stop him.
It doesn't flatten him.
It doesn't take him out
because of the meanings
that he gives the events.
We give meaning all day long.
Now, because the meanings
are informed by our beliefs,
ultimately, you want to
get rid of your beliefs.
When I got rid of the belief--
now, this is a belief
that runs people.
What makes me good enough
is having other people
think well of me.
So I would walk away from
people going, did he like me?
Da da da.
You know, I'm
doing an interview.
Did I say the right thing?
Am I talking to much?
Ugh-- like that, right?
When I got rid of that
belief, I had the freedom
to be my authentic self.
So I'm talking to you.
All I care about is the
people who are listening.
I want to give everything
I have in the time
that we have to the people.
Some people will like me.
Some people won't.
Some people will say, oh,
she has a New York accent,
or she talks too
much-- whatever.
You can't please everybody.
Now, I knew that before,
but it didn't matter.
So when something
happens now, I just
don't give the same meaning.
So my father and my
brother used to say things,
and I would get defensive
and angry and carry--
it was like, you can't talk
to me that way, [GESTURES]..
You know, and once
the belief went away,
I stopped giving meaning.
So they would say things, and
I would just go, all right.
You think I'm stupid.
You know, and now I know
they don't think I'm stupid,
but they say stuff like that.
And it just didn't--
it didn't have an impact.
And because it didn't
have an impact,
they started responding
to me differently.
Well, I didn't really
mean that, you know?
Now, here's the thing--
you can get rid of
meaning in the moment.
So there's two ways I'm going
to teach you how to do that.
Let's assume that somebody
doesn't speak to you.
Somebody walks by and
doesn't say hello,
and you start to get upset.
Or your boss yells at
you, and you go, oh god.
The moment you have a negative
emotion, stop and ask yourself,
what just happened?
Oh, let me give you
a parenting example.
What just happened?
My kid just mouthed off at me.
What meaning did I give it?
They don't respect me.
They mouthed off at me is here.
They don't respect me is here.
Meaning is never
inherent in the events.
Meaning is in your mind.
So if you get that the meaning
is separate from the event,
the emotion will go away.
Now, you can handle it.
You can say to
your child, I don't
like being spoken to that way.
I don't speak to you that way.
You know, you could
say, what's up?
Are you having a bad day?
I'll tell you a great story.
It's my favorite story.
You can also look at it and
say, what just happened?
My teenager mouth off at me.
What meaning did I give it?
They don't respect me.
What else could it mean?
It could mean they're a hormonal
teenager having a rough day.
Now, take the last step--
what does it really mean that
they just spoke to me that way?
And another way of
saying that, James,
is, what do I know for
sure because that happened?
It isn't that it doesn't
have consequences.
It isn't that we--
you know, that it
doesn't matter.
You know, I use the example--
my husband died three
and a half years ago,
and I miss him every
minute of every day.
He was an angel on this planet.
He was-- he was my everything.
And so I'd give anything
if he wasn't dead.
But the fact that
he's dead doesn't
mean I'll never be happy again,
or I'll never smile again,
or I'm going to starve
to death, or my business
is going to go under.
And those were the
meanings that I
was giving it that wanted
to keep me in bed all day.
And so I would use
this process every day.
I would grieve.
I would cry.
I would feel my pain.
But then I would say, OK, now,
what meaning are you giving it?
Oh god, I have to go to work.
I don't know how to a business.
What's going to
happen to my business?
And then I said,
well, it could mean
that your business
is going to go under,
and it could mean
that you're going
to step up and make your
business even better, which
is what happened.
So it doesn't mean anything.
I don't know anything for sure
because my husband died other
than that.
So it's not to
negate the emotions
or the missing or the grief.
I'm not saying you shouldn't
feel your emotions.
But when you want to get rid
of them, that's how you do it.
>> Great.
It sounds too easy to be true.
I mean, meaning is a process for
getting rid of a belief, right?
>> No.
>> No?
Getting rid-- no,
meaning is a process
that gets rid of an
emotion in the moment
because if I have
a negative emotion,
I can't react powerfully
because I'm upset, right?
If you want to get
rid of a belief,
then you need to get that
you never saw your belief.
We also have a way to
do this emotionally.
At the end of our process,
we do it emotionally.
But basically, if you want
to get rid of a belief,
you have to get that I never
saw my belief in the world.
It was something I just
made up, like Santa Claus.
And that's a whole process.
I mean, I'm making
it very simple.
You know, we take you
through a bunch of steps.
It's not complex, but it's not
as simple as I'm making it.
Like, oh, I never saw that.
And you can eliminate a
belief tripping over a rock.
But what you can
do intentionally
to get rid of beliefs is to look
at what are the beliefs that
are causing my problems and
do this kind of process,
and it goes away.
>> Could we finish the
story a little bit about
the incarcerated criminals
that were coming out?
Because you mentioned
one story briefly about,
I believe, that the way to solve
conflict is to beat a woman.
But then there was
the other gentleman
who believed the
right thing to do
was to shoot somebody, right?
I mean, can you go
through that because they
are radical beliefs
that people have
and people can identify
them in some way.
And then, did these
people get better?
Like, what happened
to their lives after?
I'd love to hear that story
closed out with that study?
>> Yeah.
So we did a prison study with
the University of Arizona,
where we actually produced
statistically significant
behavior change with prisoners.
And I can't remember if it
was-- it was a long time ago--
12 to 14 weeks.
And these were young,
incarcerated men
who were getting out of
prison and about to go back
into the world.
And they wanted to see
how this work would
impact the recidivism rate.
One of them was a--
they were called in those
days a "wife beater."
And he sat down with
us, and he said,
I don't want to beat women.
Can you help me?
I want to stop this.
And the belief that he had was
when you do something wrong,
you deserve to be punished,
and the way to be punished
is to beat.
So when his girlfriend or
his wife did something wrong,
he believed that she deserved
to be punished and to be beaten.
That was what you do.
So it didn't occur to
him to not do that.
And it was stunning watching
their faces when they got--
oh, that's not the truth.
There are other ways
to deal with when
people don't do what you want.
The other young man--
we formed such a relationship
with him working with him
that I invited him to our home
in Connecticut at the time.
And he was sitting with
my daughter, Blake,
and being really,
really sweet to her.
And I said to him,
you know, it is
amazing to see the sweetness
underneath the man who
shot people.
And Morty had worked with him.
And I said, what's the deal?
And he said, well, when I was
a kid, I grew up in the hood.
And my father used to
tell me that if somebody
gets in your face and razzes
you, and you don't shoot them,
you will lose
respect in the hood.
When he finished working
with us, he said to me,
I shot somebody over a $5 bill.
He said, Shelly, it never
occurred to me not to.
He said, I was so terrified that
if I lost respect in the hood,
I'd get shot.
So he goes to see his father--
in prison, of course--
and he says if--
and he tells his father about
this work that he did with us.
And his father looks at
him and says, I was wrong.
It's not worth it.
>> Wow.
Powerful.
>> Good thing he met you.
>> Oh god.
It was-- we continued
the relationship,
and watching this kid
is like-- we worked--
we were on The Leeza Show.
Leeza Gibbons was a
national show years ago.
And Morty actually went on.
Oh, no, we were both on.
And he worked with a skinhead,
and he had the beliefs--
when he was growing up,
somebody mugged his mother
and happened to be black.
And his father used to
badmouth black people.
He had the belief that
black people are dangerous.
And on television,
we did the process,
and he got rid of this belief.
Now, normally, one belief
does not necessarily
change somebody's life.
It can, but it doesn't usually.
You've got to get all the
beliefs underneath a pattern.
But this kid-- just
something shifted in him.
It was two beliefs--
black people are
dangerous, and you
have to watch out for them
or something like that.
He started to go around
to skinhead meetings
and talk to them about
how they were misguided
and that it wasn't true about
black people, and it became,
you know, his mission.
>> Wow.
Beautiful.
One of the amazing
stories, by the way--
beautiful, profound,
and life-changing,
world-changing, right?
Because we have huge,
seemingly insurmountable issues
in this world right now--
hatred, racism, division.
>> Yes.
>> And we can shift that
with the belief shift?
I mean--
>> Absolutely.
Absolutely.
I was once watching a politician
do something, you know,
and I was like
screaming at the TV.
I was like so upset.
And my husband looked
at me, and he said,
if you grew up in the
house he grew up in,
you would have the
same beliefs he had,
and you would be saying
and doing the same things.
So I do believe peace in
the Middle East is beliefs.
They want to kill us.
They hate us.
You know, and there's
cultural beliefs,
you know, beliefs that run
in organizations' culture.
We used to do a lot of
work in organizations.
Beliefs, yeah,
inform everything.
You do what you do.
You know, I got up at
6:30 in the morning
to do this because I believe
that if people hear this,
they will know they can be
free, and my belief is freedom,
being in life free to be your
authentic self is everything.
It's why-- it's why parenting is
my passion because if we could
raise children to be
their authentic selves,
to know that they can
contribute to the world,
that who they are
makes a difference,
that some people are going
to like them and some people
aren't--
it's OK.
You know, that's OK.
But they could be free
to walk their paths,
unencumbered by these beliefs.
I want to tell you a story.
So I'm at a conference,
and I have a friend here.
And she started out life--
I mean, she had when
I met her, and this
is a pretty left-leaning
organization.
We were at a dinner
table one night,
and she made a comment,
I said something, well,
but that's how the
evangelical Christians think.
And she goes, well, I'm
an evangelical Christian.
And I went, you are?
Wow.
I just didn't see that coming.
I was just really surprised
being in an organization
like this.
And of course, they
were my beliefs
about what does
it mean if you're
an evangelical Christian, right?
It doesn't mean anything.
This was many years ago.
So we were spending
the weekend together
at her beautiful
home in Big Bear.
And I said to her, tell me--
tell me about your beliefs,
about being, you know,
evangelical Christian.
And how is that for you?
And she said to me,
Shelly, listen to me.
I don't believe in
sex before marriage,
but if my daughter does, I'll
take her for birth control.
She said, I don't
believe in abortion,
but if my daughter has
one, I'll love her,
and Jesus will love her.
I can't tell the story
ever without crying
because if the world were like
that, if people were like that,
the world would work.
Here's what I believe.
What do you believe?
Oh, cool.
It was just like--
but again, that's
the power of beliefs.
We die for our beliefs.
You don't believe
what I believe?
I'm going to kill you.
Like, what?
That's what I want to stop.
That's what my mission is--
you know, to eliminate the
beliefs that cause suffering,
but also to just let people be.
Here's the-- this was
my husband's brilliance
for parenting.
If you're not hurting
yourself-- if your child is not
hurting himself,
another, or something,
they should be able to
do whatever they want.
You're not the boss of them.
You know, I say, if we could
shift the paradigm from we
are the boss of our children to
we are our children's guardian
angels, how would you
speak to somebody if you
were their guardian angel?
How would you treat them as
opposed to if you're the boss?
Sit down.
Get over here.
Stop it.
Right now.
That's the boss, you know?
You're going to
go to this school.
You're going to do this.
You're going to do that.
What comes from being
the boss of your child?
I'm powerless.
I have to do what other
people tell me to do.
It's not a belief you want
your children to have.
It's the last thing you
want your children to have.
You know, I believe--
I just want to say this because
I want it in here someplace.
So I was talking before
about the belief what
makes me good enough is having
other people think well of me
and how that runs
people's lives.
You will throw your child
sometimes under the bus
because you're worried about
somebody thinking badly of you.
Stop it!
Don't touch that!
Leave it alone.
You know, they're going
to think I'm a bad mother.
Stop crying.
Stop it.
Because you're
worried about what
strangers that you're
never going to see again
think of you.
So here's the best tool
you can give your children.
No matter what you do, somebody
is not going to like it.
So you may as well
do what you want.
However, before you do
anything, stop and ask yourself,
what might the consequences
of my actions be?
And do I want to live
with those consequences?
So when your child
gets to be a teenager,
you do not want them asking,
oh, what did I think--
you know, my daughter
was at a party once,
and it was at the top of my
hill, no cell phone service.
And she found out the
designated driver had a drink.
And she came home,
and she said, Mom,
you're going to be very happy.
I said, why?
She said, because when my friend
said to the designated driver,
I saw you drinking, I
actually asked myself,
what will the consequence
be if I stay in this car?
She didn't ask, what will
people think if I get out?
It was lifesaving.
>> Mm.
What are the most common beliefs
that people have that you see?
Because there must be
patterns with this, right?
And I think that one of the
things I'd like you to speak to
is a lack of self-worth
because our culture is
this like-addicted culture.
We're built upon how many likes
on social media did I get,
am I as successful or liked
as much as this other person?
And it seems that we walk
around in the world driven
by that as opposed to our
own sense of self-worth.
So what are the
most common beliefs
that you see that people have?
And how could those beliefs
be shaping or withholding them
from living a truly authentic
and passionate life?
>> Yeah.
I love what you just said.
So I just did a parenting
talk at a conference,
and it was the five
most common beliefs
that will keep your
children from having
the lives you want for them.
So I will tell you that.
But self-esteem-- and you
just said this so beautifully,
James, thank you--
self-esteem comes from yourself.
It comes from
esteeming yourself.
That's what it is.
I could do a whole hour talk
on just what is self-esteem.
We think our self-esteem
comes from outside of us.
So we have what we call
survival strategy beliefs.
What makes me good enough
is being successful.
And by successful, I mean
achieving things, right?
So the self-esteem beliefs,
which I will talk about
in a minute, are here.
I'm not good enough.
Number one belief--
I have never worked
with anybody that
doesn't have it, which is
why I talk about parenting.
I'd love getting tired.
I want to retire someday.
So I am not good enough.
What makes me good enough
is achieving things.
That's workaholism
right there, right?
The second belief--
I'm not important.
What makes me important
is being successful,
having a lot of money,
achieving things.
So as long as I'm doing
it, this beach ball
called I'm not good
enough, I'm not important,
stays underwater.
So it's a driven behavior.
That's why we call them survival
strategy beliefs, right?
So you think your self-esteem,
because this is underwater,
is now intact.
And people say to
me, oh, I don't have
the belief I'm not good enough.
I say, really?
What makes you good enough?
And if they answer
anything other than,
"nothing, I just am,"
they have a belief.
What makes me good enough is--
this is-- I think
this is fascinating.
If you are the oldest
of 10, what do you
think you get acknowledged for?
Taking care of the
siblings, helping.
So these people conclude
very, very often, oh,
what makes me good--
I'm not important.
I'm one of 10.
Am I getting a lot of attention?
Not a shot.
I don't care if your mother is
the best person in the world,
and your father is amazing,
you can't give 10 kids
your undivided attention.
So I'm not good enough.
I'm not important.
I get acknowledged for
helping, taking care of.
What makes me good enough is
taking care of people, right?
The way to be important
is to take care of people.
And I say to them
when I get clients
who are the oldest of 10
or have a sibling that's
the oldest of 10, I say,
oh, are they a nurse,
or are you a nurse?
How did you know that?
[LAUGHS] How did your
beliefs inform your life?
That's how.
If I believe what
makes me good enough is
taking care of
people, guess what I'm
going to spend my life doing?
Taking care of people.
If I get acknowledged
for pleasing people, what
makes me good enough
is pleasing people,
now I become a people pleaser.
So it's very elegant in
the way we look at it.
It's very simple.
So the first beliefs
are, I'm not good enough,
I'm not important,
mistakes and failures
are bad, if I make a mistake
or fail, I'll be rejected.
Those are the four
most common beliefs.
Self-esteem beliefs, or I'm
not worthy, I'm inadequate,
I'm not capable--
and let me say something
very important here.
My mother was an angel.
She was the most love--
she was love on legs.
If you came into her space, you
got love, whether you wanted it
or not.
That's who she was.
So when I was little, she
did everything for me.
Oh, I'll do it, mamaleh.
I'll do it, sweetheart.
And she was, of course,
a Jewish mother.
I'll do it.
I'll do it, sweetheart.
She couldn't stand
to see me struggle.
Guess what I concluded?
I'm not capable.
So it doesn't come
from bad parenting.
Now, here's the thing--
I could do a lot of things well.
So if you looked at my life,
you would never think--
I didn't know I had that belief.
But every time something came
hard to me, I didn't do it.
I'd stamp it out
and ask a friend.
You know, I'd tell
somebody else to do it.
I didn't say, well,
I'm going to tackle it.
You know, I'm going
to go for it because I
believed I wasn't capable.
But it didn't come out
except when I suddenly
couldn't do something well,
which I usually just didn't do.
So I'm not capable--
and again, this doesn't
come from bad parenting.
You can love your
child to death and do
things that don't serve them.
I'm inadequate.
I'm not capable.
I'm not worthy.
I don't deserve.
Those are the most
common beliefs.
What makes me good enough is
having other people think well
of me is the single most common
survival strategy belief.
And what makes me good
enough are my achievements.
Those two are
tremendously common.
>> This is really deep.
This went deeper than I thought
because one thing I'm observing
in this is that
people go to the world
and become a workaholic
to hide their beliefs
or to try to prove themselves
right or somebody else wrong.
And an interesting
observation is
my father was successful
in a worldly respect.
He worked really hard,
but he burnt out.
He got really sick,
and that drove
us to start "Food Matters"
and explore that nutrition
could help and help him detox.
And he healed his body and got
off medications and was well.
So it's a good story in the end.
>> Beautiful.
>> However, he worked and
worked and worked and worked
and worked and
worked and burnt out.
And so many people--
I call it BOMAPS, Burnt Out
Middle-Aged Professional
Syndrome.
And so many people are
suffering from that,
and I'm seeing it now as they're
compensating for a belief,
and they're out there pushing
and pushing and pushing
into the world.
And they're like,
why aren't I happy?
Why aren't I at
peace with my life?
Why don't I have
this sense of peace?
And I'll look at, say,
an indigenous culture,
where they may not
have this well,
you have to have money
to be successful,
and you have to have
things to be successful,
and you have to have this.
And if you have that,
then you are a good human,
and you can give yourself
self-worth because that's--
you know, you've made it.
>> Yes.
>> They don't have
it, so they're happy.
>> They're happy.
>> Ha, I love it!
>> And then I look at my father,
and he's gone through this
life--
I need all these things, and
then I'll finally be happy.
And then I look at
the world, right?
We are just killing
ourselves for our beliefs,
and then we get
there, and they're
like this is the
retirement thing,
and they retire and die unhappy.
What's going on here?
>> Yes.
Yes, this is fabulous.
So I want to say two
things about that.
First of all, people are
not like I want to be right,
and he was, oh--
and he's selfish, and he's this.
I have had people call
me, James, and say--
I use this one guy.
He owned a very successful
wealth firm, wealth management
firm, financial firm.
And he said to me,
Shelly, I don't--
my wife's-- I'm
worth $10 million.
My wife's ready to leave me.
I don't know my kids.
I keep promising I'm going to
leave the office, and I can't.
He said, I'm going
to lose everything.
I'm on the cover of
business publications.
When is it going to be enough?
To which I replied, never.
Never.
It's never enough.
Here's why-- because
your success doesn't--
exactly what you just said--
doesn't make you good enough.
It makes you feel--
it doesn't make you feel.
The meaning you
give it makes you
feel good enough for 10 minutes.
So oh, I just--
I use Hollywood, famous
people in Hollywood.
You look at Marilyn
Monroe, Heath Ledger,
you know, people who
have burned brightly--
Philip Seymour Hoffman.
Drugs, you know, suicide--
why?
I have the belief
I'm not good enough.
What makes me good enough
is money, fame, power,
beauty, right?
I now have all of those things.
It doesn't make me good enough.
See, if something
makes you something--
if you participate
in the Olympics,
that makes you an Olympian.
I'm now an Olympian.
I don't have to do it anymore.
I'm an Olympian for
the rest of my life.
This is a heroin addiction.
What makes me good
enough is being famous.
So now I'm famous, except
the belief didn't go away
because I still
think I saw I'm not
good enough from my childhood.
So as long as I saw it,
it's not going anyplace.
You can't not believe
something you think you saw.
That's why our
beliefs stay with us.
So now, we get the money.
We get the fame.
We get the power.
We're CEO.
I think it's hilarious that
every fear of public speaking
client I have says, oh,
the minute the CEO walks
in the room, I panic.
And then I get the
CEO on, and he says,
oh, I have 1,500 employees,
and I have to make a speech,
and I'm a wreck.
Why?
He's the CEO.
Because guess what?
He has the same beliefs
the other guy has.
Being the CEO didn't
make him not good
enough because
when I said to him,
where did you get the
belief I'm not good enough?
Oh, my father, you know,
called me an idiot every day,
or my father criticized
me, or I could never please
my father, whatever it is.
Then, we do the process.
Oh, doesn't it seem like
you saw I'm not good enough?
I did.
Well, if you saw I'm not good
enough, then that must be true,
and the fact that he's
famous is irrelevant.
That's why.
That's why the
beliefs are so driven.
That's why people
kill themselves
because when they get what
they want, like your father--
I reached the pinnacle,
and guess what?
It didn't change anything.
The beliefs don't go away.
>> Wow.
>> So having said that, this is
how I want to make sure we end
with--
not end with this, but
we have this in here.
If, in fact, your
beliefs determine
the outcome of your life,
what is your job as a parent?
Every time your child walks away
from an interaction with you,
stop and ask yourself, what
did they just conclude?
And is that a belief
I want them to have
for the rest of their lives?
And if it's not, just
go back and clean it up.
Just say, I didn't
mean to yell at you.
I was just having a bad day,
or I just got frustrated.
I-- use I messages.
You didn't frustrate me.
You didn't make me anything.
I felt sad.
I felt bad.
I felt angry.
I felt disrespected.
Whatever you feel, clean it up.
Let the child know
they are fine.
You had a moment.
And that is the most
important thing.
And the second thing
is, at what cost--
at what cost must
you have your child
do what you want them to do?
At what cost to
their self-esteem,
to their ability to be free and
in the world and be themselves?
Nothing is worth it.
If they're not hurting
themself, another, or something,
let it go.
I was going to tell you a story.
My daughter was very
hormonal and a teenager,
and she walked in
the house one day.
And my husband--
I called him the Jewish Saint.
He was just an amazing father.
And she walks in one day,
and he said something,
she said something.
She goes, oh my god,
you're being such a dick!
And I like--
I was like, what?
You know, I jumped off my chair.
I was like-- I didn't even
know what I was going to do,
but I was going towards her.
I was like, you speak to this
amazing father like that?
And he turns around,
he looks me, said,
Shelly, relax, it's a word.
He didn't give it meaning.
She walks into her
room, slams the door.
He goes to the door of
her room, and he says,
I hear a teenager
who loves her father
and is not in touch
with it at this moment.
And from inside the
door, you hear a giggle,
and she throws her
shoe at the door.
Then, she comes out, and she
goes, oh my god, Daddy, I'm
so sorry.
I'm so sorry.
I never, ever want to talk
to you like that again.
You don't deserve-- I had
the worst day of my life.
He held her.
They had a moment.
And here's why I
share this story--
Mother's Day.
A few months ago, we're sitting
at the Jacuzzi at my place,
celebrating Mother's Day.
We started talking about Morty.
And she said, Mom, it wasn't
that he said those words.
It was in that moment, I knew
he would love me no matter what,
that I could be a brat, that
I could be a spoiled whatever,
and that he would love me.
And my husband's proudest moment
was when she was a teenager,
and they walked down the
street, she held his hand.
They-- I'm afraid to
say this because I
don't want to ruin
my credibility,
but they never
fought after that.
It was the most amazing moment.
And that's the power
of not giving meaning,
of not having it at what cost.
She's got to talk to me.
>> Wow, you're making me cry.
[LAUGHS]
>> It's a great story.
>> That's so beautiful.
It's so beautiful.
The power of love, right?
>> Oh.
>> The power of love.
>> Unconditional love, yes.
Yes.
>> OK, Shelly.
Last question.
>> OK.
How do we change the world?
How do we make this
world a better place?
If we are such
conditioned beings,
and our conditioned
behavior causes
us to go out into the
world and struggle and toil
and have mental turmoil--
I mean, we've never seen the
rates of anxiety and depression
that we have, ever, in the
history of well, and suicide,
for that matter.
We're dying of our
own accord, and we're
dying lonely and in anguish.
How do we solve that
anguish, either in the moment
and as a whole, for
the future of humanity?
>> It's interesting because
it's my least favorite question
because the answer,
for me, is so simple.
If we could get rid
of our beliefs that
have us feel anxious, that have
us feel hate, that have us not
honor other people for
whatever they believe,
I do believe that when people
eliminate their beliefs,
they are in life differently.
They're not defensive.
They're not protective.
They're not angry.
And not defensive is very big.
I don't have to defend myself.
I don't have to prove myself.
People are going to watch this.
They'll say, boy, that's
great, or if she's--
you know.
I just can present,
give what I have,
hope that some people are
positively impacted by it.
It's a very powerful concept.
But the real way that the
world is going to change
is if you don't hit
your child, your child
will never believe that violence
is the way to handle things.
That will stop war--
right there.
It's just-- that's
just not an option.
See, our behavior is limited
by the boxes or the beliefs
that we have.
Inside the belief that violence
is a way to handle things,
there's lots of possible
actions you could take--
shoot, bomb, you
know, take over.
But the option of conflict
resolution is outside the box
that violence is the
way to handle things,
and beliefs are boxes.
So we have to raise
children who are conscious.
And by that, I mean who honor--
so I used to tell my
children, I treat you
with dignity and respect.
You treat me with
dignity and respect--
not because I'm your
mother, but because that's
how you treat people--
period.
You cannot like--
you cannot like them.
You cannot want to be with them.
You cannot care for
what they believe in.
But you treat
people respectfully.
I do not want to be
spoken to like that.
I don't-- I'm not going to
be with you if you're going
to treat me badly.
I'm just not.
But I'm not going to call
you an idiot and a moron
and hit you and scream at you.
I don't have to.
So if we raise a conscious
generation of children
who believe that mistakes
and failures are learning
opportunities, or that there's
no such thing as mistakes
and failures.
There's only outcomes.
You like the outcome?
Great.
You don't?
Fix it.
No judgments.
I tell parents-- get
rid of four words--
right, wrong, good, bad.
Don't ever use them again.
Describe what you think,
what you feel, what you want,
what you need.
Use I messages.
But get rid of judgments.
And the world will work.
It just will.
[LAUGHS]
>> Magical, Shelly.
I love it.
What a powerful
message you have.
>> Thank you.